docs(logs): address review findings for logging and machine-dpu-logs (#3185)
NVIDIA/bare-metal-manager-core: docs/observability/logging.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>
nico-ssh-console is an exception - in addition to stdout, it writes **machine console output** (BMC serial console streams) to local files. These are not service logs but captured output from managed machines. See [Machine console logs](#25-machine-console-logs-nico-ssh-console) for details.
</Note>
```

|-----------|--------|------------|-------|
| **nico-api** | `carbide-api` | logfmt | Primary control plane. Supports runtime level changes. |
| **nico-dns** | `carbide-dns` | JSON | DNS resolution service. |

> | **nico-dhcp** | Kea + `libdhcp.so` | Kea format | See section 2.6 below. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **nico-dhcp** | Kea + `libdhcp.so` | Kea format | See [Kea DHCP format](#26-kea-dhcp-format-nico-dhcp). |
```

| **nico-pxe** | `carbide` | plain text | iPXE boot service. Hand-rolled `println!`, no log levels. |
| **nico-bmc-proxy** | `carbide-bmc-proxy` | logfmt | BMC credential proxy. |
| **nico-hardware-health** | `forge-hw-health` | logfmt | Hardware health monitoring. |

> | **nico-ssh-console** | `ssh-console` | compact | SSH console access. Also captures machine/DPU console output to files (see 2.5). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **nico-ssh-console** | `ssh-console` | compact | SSH console access. Also captures machine/DPU console output to files (see [Machine console logs](#25-machine-console-logs-nico-ssh-console)). |
```

| **nico-dsx-exchange-consumer** | `carbide-dsx-exchange-consumer` | logfmt | DSX message consumer. |
| **nico-dpu-otel-agent** | `forge-dpu-otel-agent` | full | mTLS cert renewal agent on DPUs. See note below. |

> **Note**: `nico-dpu-otel-agent` currently ignores `RUST_LOG` due to a source bug
> (`fmt().init()` instead of `fmt::init()`). It logs at INFO level only until this is fixed.

> > See [#3151](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/issues/3151).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>
`nico-dpu-otel-agent` currently ignores `RUST_LOG` due to a source bug (`fmt().init()` instead of `fmt::init()`). It logs at INFO level only until this is fixed. See [#3151](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/issues/3151).
</Note>
```

### 2.1 logfmt format

Most NICo components use [logfmt](https://brandur.org/logfmt) - a line-oriented format of
space-separated `key=value` pairs, easy for both humans and machines to parse.

**Event lines** — one per log call:

> ```

Reviewer: **Every** fenced code block should have a language.

Anything the source highlighter doesn't understand, it just formats as text. So, `logfmt` gets you plain text, as does `text` or `MonsterBabble`. ([Supported language list is here](https://buildwithfern.com/learn/docs/writing-content/components/code-blocks))
````suggestion
```text
````

Components that **do not** use the logfmt layer and carry no `component` field:

| Component | Binary | Format | Notes |
|-----------|--------|--------|-------|
| nico-dns | `carbide-dns` | JSON | Uses tracing-subscriber JSON formatter |
| nico-pxe | `carbide` | plain text | Hand-rolled `println!`, no log levels |
| nico-ssh-console | `ssh-console` | compact | Uses tracing-subscriber compact formatter |
| nico-dpu-otel-agent | `forge-dpu-otel-agent` | full | Default tracing-subscriber formatter. Ignores `RUST_LOG`. |

> | nico-dhcp | Kea + `libdhcp.so` | Kea | Production uses Kea logger, not Rust tracing (see 2.6) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| nico-dhcp | Kea + `libdhcp.so` | Kea | Production uses Kea logger, not Rust tracing (see [Kea DHCP format](#26-kea-dhcp-format-nico-dhcp)) |
```

> OpenTelemetry Collector sidecar (`lokiLogCollector.enabled: true`) that ships console logs
> to Loki. The sidecar reads from `/var/log/consoles/*.log`, extracts the machine ID and BMC
> IP from filenames, and exports to your Loki endpoint. To use a different backend, customize
> the `configFiles.otelcolConfig` value in the chart. See [Machine and DPU Logs](machine-dpu-logs.md)

> > for detailed collection workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip title="Centralizing console logs">
The nico-ssh-console Helm chart includes an optional OpenTelemetry Collector sidecar (`lokiLogCollector.enabled: true`) that ships console logs to Loki. The sidecar reads from `/var/log/consoles/*.log`, extracts the machine ID and BMC IP from filenames, and exports to your Loki endpoint. To use a different backend, customize the `configFiles.otelcolConfig` value in the chart. See [Machine and DPU Logs](machine-dpu-logs.md) for detailed collection workflows.
</Tip>
```

### 2.6 Kea DHCP format (nico-dhcp)

The nico-dhcp Helm chart runs [Kea DHCP](https://www.isc.org/kea/), with NICo's DHCP logic
loaded as a Kea hook library (`libdhcp.so`). All logging from the hook routes through Kea's
logger, meaning:

- Log format follows **Kea's format**, not logfmt
- Log levels are configured via **Kea's `loggers` config**, not `RUST_LOG`
- Output goes to Kea's configured destinations (stdout by default in the container)

Example Kea log output:
```
2026-07-06 10:15:23.456 INFO  [kea-dhcp4.hooks/12345] DHCP4_SUBNET_SELECTED [hwtype=1 ...] subnet selected

> ```

Reviewer: Need a blank line before (and after) fenced code blocks
````suggestion
Example Kea log output:

```text
2026-07-06 10:15:23.456 INFO  [kea-dhcp4.hooks/12345] DHCP4_SUBNET_SELECTED [hwtype=1 ...] subnet selected
```
````

To adjust log levels, modify the Kea configuration in the Helm chart's ConfigMap. The
`loggers` section controls verbosity:

```json
{
  "Dhcp4": {
    "loggers": [
      {
        "name": "kea-dhcp4",
        "severity": "INFO",
        "debuglevel": 0,
        "output_options": [
          { "output": "stdout" }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Set `severity` to `DEBUG` and increase `debuglevel` (0-99) for more verbose output from
the NICo hook. The hook maps Rust log levels to Kea severity: `info` → INFO, `debug` →
DEBUG/10, `trace` → DEBUG/99.

> **Dev environment**: The standalone `forge-dhcp-server` binary uses logfmt output and

> > respects `RUST_LOG`. It is used for local development and testing only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip title="Dev environment">
The standalone `forge-dhcp-server` binary uses logfmt output and respects `RUST_LOG`. Use the standalone binary for local development and testing only.
</Tip>
```

RUST_LOG=info,carbide=debug,hyper=error
```

**Exceptions**: nico-pxe uses hand-rolled `println!` with no level concept. nico-dpu-otel-agent
currently ignores `RUST_LOG` due to a source bug (logs at INFO only). nico-dhcp uses Kea's
logger config instead (see section 2.6).

Three binaries accept a `--debug` flag that sets the default level to DEBUG:

```bash

> # carbide-api: --debug is a parent flag, must precede subcommand

Reviewer: If the parent flag thing is true for all three, make that part of line 266's text. Then you don't even need the three comment lines in this block.

When the expiry elapses, the log filter **automatically reverts** to the startup value. This
prevents accidentally leaving debug logging on and filling your storage.

> **Note**: Expiry is checked every 15 minutes by an internal poll. A filter with `--expiry 5min`

> > will actually revert at the next 15-minute poll cycle, not exactly at 5 minutes.

Reviewer: As I've suggested elsewhere, use Fern's components for a nicer presentation.
```suggestion
<Note>
Expiry is checked every 15 minutes by an internal poll. A filter with `--expiry 5min` will actually revert at the next 15-minute poll cycle, not exactly at 5 minutes.
</Note>
```

and works with any OTLP-compatible backend: Grafana Loki, Elasticsearch, VictoriaLogs, Datadog,
Splunk, etc.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: High fives for replacing the text with Mermaid!

|---------|-------|-----|
| No logs from a component | Container not running, or stdout not captured | `kubectl logs <pod>` to verify. Check container status. |
| Logs not reaching backend | Collector not running, or exporter misconfigured | Check collector logs: `kubectl logs -l app=opentelemetry-collector`. Verify exporter endpoint. |

> | Missing fields in backend | logfmt not parsed | Add a transform processor to parse logfmt, or use `\| logfmt` operator in Loki queries. |

Reviewer: Do you mean to have the backslash here? It doesn't look like it's needed in Loki queries, and the pipe character doesn't escaping in a code string here.

Author: I think this pipe character might interfere with the ASCII table columns. I decided to escape it

Author: It's rendered properly in the resulting document

### Checking current log level (nico-api)

The startup log shows the initial log level. Look for lines like:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
The startup log shows the initial log level. Look for lines similar to the following:

```text
````

level=INFO msg="current log level: INFO" location="setup.rs:142"
```

> Note that this shows the coarse `LevelFilter` (e.g., INFO), not the full directive string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this shows the coarse `LevelFilter` (such as INFO), not the full directive string.
```
